---
pagetitle: A new file hosting solution
author: Christoph Müller
keywords: [speedport, network, drive, sync]
---

I have been hosting a version of [seafile](https://www.seafile.com/) for over 5 years. It served its purpose quite well. The concept of libraries helps to separate different files. The clients are also not bad though I had some problems the android app and video playback. It seems to be quite picky when comes to the file format and it also sometimes has video playback hickups.
But most of these issues could easily be tolerated. The problem I have is that storage on my provider [hetzner](https://hetzner.de) is quite expensive. I paid around 13€/month. Most of that because of storage. I only really needed the 6€/month option when it came to performance.

So since living in the new house which has a decent 40mbit/s upload and a new speedport router I decided to build a local solution. It is made from the following components:

- A speedport router (Speedport Smart 4)
- A USB Gen 3.2 128 GB flash drive attached to the router
- A wireguard server/client solution (supported natively by the router)

The following devices needed access to the files:

- My Phone (local and remote)
- My MacBook (local and remote)
- My desktop PC (local)

The setup was suprisingly simple. I just needed to enable a couple of options on the router. The wireguard setup was simply a qr code I scanned with my phone then I exported it to my laptop as a .zip file. The windows PC would just use the native network drive functionality.

All of this was working quite smoothly. There were only a couple of performance issues with network clients and the network discovery process. The windows explorer even crashed 2 times (seriously in 2023?). But since theses drives are now added to my favorites the discovery process is completed and performance has been pretty good so far. Since redundancy is now lost I added an rsync script to export some important files to my new smaller hetzner server. Overall I paid around 15€ for my usb flash drive and now pay around 6.50€/month for the new hetzner server. So around 3 months and the savings will have paid for the usb drive. The only downside is the required network / VPN connection.
